I figured we turned east out of McChord. Not that there was much of a
choice. West was Russia and Japan and China, and I doubted such a
small plane had that kind of range. I asked the steward where we were
going, and he said he hadn’t seen the flight plan. Which was obvious
bullshit. But I didn’t push it. He turned out to be a chatty guy on every
other subject. He told me the plane was a Gulfstream IV, confiscated
from a bent hedge fund during a federal proceeding, and reissued to the
Air Force for VIP transportation. In which case Air Force VIPs were lucky
people. The plane was terrific. It was quiet and solid, and the armchairs
were sensational. They adjusted every which way. And there was coffee
in the galley. A proper drip machine. I told the guy to keep it going, but
that I would go back and forth myself, for refills. He appreciated that. I
think he took it as a mark of respect. He wasn’t really a steward,
obviously. He was some kind of a security escort, tough enough to get
the job, and proud I knew it.
I watched out the window, first at the Rockies, which had dark green
trees low down and blinding white snow high up. Then came the tawny
agricultural plains, in tiny mosaic fragments, plowed and sowed and
harvested, over and over again, and not rained on much. By the look of
the land I figured we clipped the corner of South Dakota and saw a bit of
Nebraska before setting out over Iowa. Which because of the geometric
complexities of high altitude flight meant we were likely aiming some
ways south. A Great Circle route. Weird on a flat paper map, but just
right for a spherical planet. We were going to Kentucky, or Tennessee, or
the Carolinas. Georgia, even.
We droned on, hour after hour, two full pots of coffee, and then the
ground got a little closer. At first I thought it was Virginia, but then I
figured it was North Carolina. I saw two towns that could only be
Winston-Salem and Greensboro. They were on the left, and receding a
little. Which meant we were heading southeast. No towns until
Fayetteville. But just before that came Fort Bragg. Which was where
Special Forces HQ was located. Which was Tom O’Day’s natural
economic habitat.
Wrong again. Or right, technically, but in name only. We landed in the
evening dark at what used to be Pope Air Force Base, which had since
been given away to the army. Now it was just Pope Field, just a small
corner of an ever-bigger Fort Bragg. Reforms. Politicians will do
anything to save a buck.
We taxied a long time, tiny on tarmac big enough for airlift squadrons.
Eventually we stopped near a small administrative building. I saw a sign
that said 47th Logistics, Tactical Support Command. The engines shut
down and the steward opened the hatch and lowered the steps.
“Which door?” I said.
“The red one,” he said.
I went down and walked ahead through the dark. There was only one
red door. It opened when I was six feet from it. A young woman in a
black skirt suit came out. Dark nylons. Good shoes. A very young
woman. She had to be still in her twenties. She had blonde hair and
green eyes and a heart-shaped face. Which had a big warm welcoming
smile on it.
She said, “I’m Casey Nice.”
I said, “Casey what?”
“Nice.”
“I’m Jack Reacher.”
“I know. I work for the State Department.”
“In D.C.?”
“No, here,” she said.
Which made some kind of sense. Special Forces were the armed wing
of the CIA, which was the hands-on wing of the State Department, and
some decisions would require all three fingers in the same pie all at
once. Hence her presence on the base, young as she was. Maybe she was
a policy genius. Some kind of a prodigy. I said, “Is Shoemaker here?”
She said, “Let’s go inside.”
She led me to a small room with a wired glass window. It had three
armchairs in it, none of them matching, all of them a little sad and
abandoned. She said, “Let’s sit down.”
I said, “Why am I here?”
She said, “First you must understand everything you hear from this
point onward is a classified secret. There will be a severe penalty for a
breach of security.”
“Why would you trust me with secrets? You never met me before. You
know nothing about me.”
“Your file has been circulated. You had a security clearance. It was
never revoked. You’re still bound by it.”
“Am I free to leave?”
“We’d prefer you to stay.”
“Why?”
“We want to talk to you.”
“The State Department?”
“Did you agree to the part about classified secrets?”
I nodded. “What does the State Department want with me?”
“We have certain obligations.”
“In what respect?”
“Someone took a shot at the president of France.”
“In Paris.”
“The French have appealed for international cooperation. To find the
perpetrator.”
“It wasn’t me. I was in LA.”
“We know it wasn’t you. You’re not on the list.”
“There’s a list?”
She didn’t answer that, except to reach high up between her jacket
and her blouse and pull out a folded sheet of paper, which she handed to
me. It was warm from her body, and slightly curved. But it wasn’t a list.
It was a summary report from our embassy in Paris. From the CIA Head
of Station, presumably. The nuts and bolts of the thing.
The range had been exceptional. An apartment balcony fourteen
hundred yards away had been identified as the rifleman’s hide. Fourteen
hundred yards was more than three-quarters of a mile. The French
president had been at an open-air podium behind wings of thick
bulletproof glass. Some kind of a new improved material. No one had
seen the shot except the president himself. He had seen an impossibly
distant muzzle flash, small and high and far to his left, and then more
than three whole perceptible seconds later a tiny white star had
appeared on the glass, like a pale insect alighting. A long, long shot. But
the glass had held, and the sound of the bullet’s impact against it had
triggered an instant reaction, and the president had been buried under a
scrum of security people. Later enough bullet fragments had been found
to guess at a fifty-caliber armor-piercing round.
I said, “I’m not on the list because I’m not good enough. Fourteen
hundred yards is a very long way, against a head-sized target. The bullet
is in the air three whole seconds. Like dropping a stone down a very
deep well.”
Casey Nice nodded and said, “The list is very short. Which is why the
French are worried.”
They hadn’t been worried immediately. That was clear. According to
the summary report they had spent the first twenty-four hours
congratulating themselves on having enforced such a distant perimeter,
and on the quality of their bulletproof glass. Then reality had set in, and
they had lit up the long-distance phones. Who knew a sniper that good?
“Bullshit,” I said.
Casey Nice said, “What part?”
“You don’t care about the French. Not this much. Maybe you would
make some appropriate noises and get a couple of interns to write a term
paper. But this thing crossed Tom O’Day’s desk. For five seconds, at
least. Which makes it important. And then you had a SEAL on my ass
inside twenty-eight minutes, and then you flew me across the continent
in a private jet. Obviously both the SEAL and the jet were standing by,
but equally obviously you had no idea where I was or when I would call,
so you must have had a whole bunch of SEALs and a whole bunch of jets
standing by, here, there, and everywhere, all over the country, day and
night. Just in case. And if it’s me, it’s others, too. This is a full-court
press.”
“It would complicate things if it was an American shooter.”
“Why would it be?”
“We hope it isn’t.”
“What can I do for you that’s worth a private jet?”
Her phone rang in her pocket. She answered and listened and put it
back. She said, “General O’Day will explain. He’s ready to see you now.”